>> Tell me about the third step.
>> The third step is nutrients,
so nutrients are very important
to make all of our brain
chemicals or to produce
anything in our body.
But when you go through
a period of time,
where you've been eating
foods you're allergic to
and your gut is
inflamed, or you've
been carrying gut bacteria
that causes gut inflammation as
well--
>> Which is step
one and step two.
>> Step one and step two.
What you find is
that the body hasn't
been able to absorb
nutrients for quite awhile.
So then we find secondary
reasons for depression.
So we find nutrient
deficiencies,
often vitamin B12 is low.
Vitamin D can be low.
Iron, folate-- a lot
of these nutrients
are necessary for
the brain chemicals.
And we haven't
absorbed them very well
over the period of time,
so we become deficient.
So we need to go
through and check
what our deficiencies
are, and get them
back up to normal levels at the
same time as correcting the gut
function so that you
can then lift yourself
into an optimal level
and provide the ability
to make those brain
chemicals all at once.
>> Sure.
So if we're low on vitamin
D or we're low on B12,
do you recommend
supplementation,
or do you recommend food-based
sources, a combination of both?
I mean--
>> A combination of both.
You always should be
having a varied diet anyway
to be able to absorb
your nutrients,
and yes, if someone's
iron deficient,
we need to encourage them
getting those really rich iron
sources from their
food so that they don't
rely on supplements long term.
I'm not a believer in people
taking supplements long term,
but I am a believer in
someone taking supplements
for the period of time
that it takes to get them
from absolutely no nutrition
level up to a standard level,
because otherwise, it can take a
very, very long time if they're
relying on what they're
getting from their diet.
These days, the food that is
available to us isn't always
rich in those nutrients, isn't
always as rich as it could be,
and a lot of people
can't necessarily
afford organic food as
well, even though that would
be fantastic and the optimum.
Being able to get there,
being able to spend
the money on that, it's
not always available.
So taking nutrients for that
period of time to get them back
to that level and
then relying on diet
to keep their body right.
>> OK, so-- and do you find that
those nutrients that you just
mentioned-- the B12,
the vitamin D, the--
what were the other two?
>> The iron.
>> Yeah, the iodine [INAUDIBLE].
>> And the iodine, and
then did you say B3?
>> Yeah, B3's important.
Niacin as well.
Folate-- all of
those B vitamins are
necessary for brain
chemical production.
>> And they're the most common
ones that you find that people
are deficient in when suffering
from depression and anxiety
and ADHD?
>> Yeah, generally.
The electrolytes seem
to not be too much
of an issue, such as magnesium
and calcium, potassium.
These kinds of things only
tend to shift a little bit,
and they tend to shift when
you have allergy responses.
But the nutrients are
very, very important,
and they really have to be
there to fill those pathways
to those brain chemicals.
You also need to look
at genetic issues that
may cause you to not absorb
your nutrients properly.
And these can affect up
to 40% of the population.
So there's a condition
called pyroluria, where it
is affecting a lot of people.
It is an inability to
absorb zinc and B6.
Now zinc and B6 are necessary
for you to produce stomach
acid, but they are the
most abundant nutrients
to be able to produce
every brain chemical.
So without that supplementation
for those people,
and they might not know that
they've got this condition,
and they will have
had it from birth.
These people grow
up as shy children.
They're nervous,
they're anxious,
and they can develop depression
or anxiety further on in life
or that fear, ongoing fears.
It can cause insomnia.
It can cause--
I find it causes other
problems, such as allergy
and bacterial problems later,
because food allergy needs
really good stomach acid to
be able to process your food.
And zinc and B6 is
necessary for stomach acid.
And then your stomach
acid is required
to protect you from bacteria.
You're swallowing
bacteria every single day.
The stomach acid is designed
to kill that and stop it
from colonizing in your gut.
So if you don't have
enough stomach acid,
because you have a
zinc or B6 deficiency,
you're more likely to suffer
with bacterial infections
than someone who can go
anywhere in the world,
and they call them an
iron gut people that
never get affected by anything.
They've got really rich
levels of zinc and B6,
and their body's
digesting properly.
So if you have a
digestive issue,
it can cause all of these
nutritional deficiencies.
>> Sure.
>> There's also another
genetic disorder,
which can cause under
or over-methylation,
and that's inability
to absorb folate or B9.
So those people
can respond worse
when you give them feel folate.
They need to have it converted
in their body for them.
They also need to have
some liver support to be
able to methylate properly.
That under or
over-methylation problem
can cause anxiety,
depression, really high
performing people,
so perfectionists,
or very nervous type people.
It can look like a
personality trait,
but it actually comes
down to the liver.
>> Wow.
So for the layperson who
can try to maybe identify
some of the foods
they are allergic to
and remove them,
or have a test done
with their local practitioner,
and the next step
is they get a stool
analysis, and they
start supplementing with
the probiotics and also
the herbal antibiotics.
Then they get to the nutrients.
How are you able to
determine what nutrients
you might be deficient in?
Is that like a hair
and mineral analysis,
or are there general
supplement recommendations
that you make for
people that are going
through anxiety and depression?
Or you don't [INAUDIBLE] that?
>> No, I-- being that I've been
working with this for so long,
my experience tells me what
someone might be deficient
in in terms of brain chemicals.
And so I'll fill that
pathway with basic nutrients,
so that's one component.
But there are a lot
of nutrients that I
won't give unless a blood
test shows that it's down.
>> Sure.
>> So what are some of the
general ones that you would
recommend for most people?
>> Oh, generally,
magnesium, vitamin C,
a good rich complex vitamin
B, or multivitamin zinc--
so important.
You almost can't
overdose on zinc.
And the amount of people
who are deficient in zinc.
>> So zinc,
magnesium, vitamin C,
and a really strong B
vitamin [INAUDIBLE]..
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
If you can get those, you can
be making a lot of your energy.
So it doesn't account for
if you have other problems,
and you need to resolve
them, but it's a good start.
>> OK.
>> Yeah.
>> Great.